#summary "Hierarchical Organization in Complex Networks": revisao

*Titulo*: Hierarchical Organization in Complex Networks

*Autores*: Erzsebet Ravasz and Albert-Laszlo Barabasi

*Ano*: 2003

----

O artigo apresenta um modelo determinístico de redes livres de escala hierárquicas e a partir dele deriva um modelo estocástico. A organização hierárquica é caracterizada pela distribuição do coeficiente de clustering, C(k), que obedece à lei C(k) ~ 1/k. Experimentos mostram que diversas redes possuem organização hierárquica -- rede de atores, rede de sinônimos, rede www, internet no domínio AS -- mas algumas outras -- internet no nível de roteador e rede elétrica -- não. Os autores atribuem a falta de organização hierárquica a restrições geográficas. Os autores apontam outros modelos que provavelmente obedecem à lei de escala C(k) ~ 1/k e concluem que o papel dos hubs em redes hierárquicas é unir os vários módulos coesos. 

== Citações 

the clustering coefficient of real networks is to a high degree independent of the number of nodes in the network (p. 1) 

modular: one can easily identify groups of nodes that are highly interconnected with each other, but have only a few or no links to nodes outside of the grop to which they belong to (p. 1) 

We argue that his scaling law quantifies the coexistence of a hierarchy of nodes with different degrees of clustering (p. 3) 

hierarchy is absent in networks with strong geographical constraints, as the limitation on the link length strongly constraints the network topology (p. 4) 

the fitness model [39, 40] displays a C(k) that appears to scale with k. (p. 5) 

there is evidence that the model of active nodes [41] obeys the scaling law (p. 5) 

the scaling of C(k) depends on the parameter p, which governs the rate at which new nodes connect to the neighbors of selected nodes. (p. 6) 

most networks have a modular topology, quantified by the high clustering coefficient they display. (p. 6) 

we should not think of modularity as the coexistence of relatively independent groups of nodes. (p. 6) 

the hubs play the important role of bridging the many small communities of clusters into a single, integrated network. (p. 6)
      
